Advanced Test plan tutorial (infra) (#1662)
canonical/checkbox: docs/tutorial/writing-tests/test-plan.rst

.. _test_plan:

=================
Writing Test Plan
=================

This tutorial will guide you in writing a test plan to test the Network
connection in your machine. We will do this by re-using tests that are already
available in the ``tutorial provider`` and that you got to write yourself in
the previous tutorial.

Inclusions
==========

> When we want a test plan to contain a test what we do in Checkbox is including

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we want a test plan to contain a test, what we do in Checkbox is including
```

it. There are a few kinds of inclusions but they all have the same underlying
purpose: to tell Checkbox that we want to run something. Start by creating a
new test plan in the same provider we created in the previous tutorial.

.. note::

  We generally advise to keep test plans ant test jobs in separate files, but
  this is not compulsory. You can find this definition in
  ``providers/tutorial/units/test-plan.pxu``

We now have a convenient container where to put all tests we previously

> developed, let's include them in a new ``test plan``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
developed, let's include them in a new ``test plan``:
```

.. code-block::

  unit: test plan
  id: tutorial-extended
  _name: Extended Tutorial Test Plan
  include:
    network_available
    network_speed

To run the test plan we can use ``run`` as we previously did for individual
tests:

.. code-block::

   (checkbox_venv) $ checkbox-cli run com.canonical.certification::tutorial-extended
   [...]
   ==================================[ Results ]===================================
   ☑ : Fetches information of all network interfaces
   ☑ : Test that the internet is reachable
   ☑ : Test that the network speed is acceptable

Note how, as we previously saw, Checkbox automatically pulled the resource

> job need. This operation, as we previously mention, is not the safe way to go

Reviewer: ```suggestion
job needed. This operation, as we previously mentioned, is not the safe way to go
```

       "unit": "job"
     },
     {
       "_summary": "Fetches information of all network interfaces",
       "certification-status": "non-blocker",
       "command": " ip -details -json link show | jq -r '\n     .[] | \"interface: \" + .ifname +\n     \"\\nlink_info_kind: \" + .linkinfo.info_kind +\n     \"\\nlink_type: \" + .link_type +\n     \"\\noperstate: \" + .operstate + \"\\n\"'",
       "id": "com.canonical.certification::network_iface_info",
       "plugin": "resource",
       "unit": "job"
     },
     {
       "_summary": "Test that the network speed is acceptable",
       "certification-status": "non-blocker",
       "command": " curl -Y 600 -o /dev/null \\\n   https://cdimage.ubuntu.com/ubuntu-mini-iso/noble/daily-live/current/",
       "depends": "network_available",
       "flags": "simple",
       "id": "com.canonical.certification::network_speed",
       "unit": "job"
     }
  ]

Status Overrides
================

The certification status of a job can be defined in its definition. This is
useful, but limiting, as one may want the same test to be a certification
blocker in one test plan while not in another. Checkbox supports overrides in

> test plan that allow you to change the certification status (common) or the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
test plans that allow you to change the certification status (common) or the
```

category (uncommon) of a job in that specific test plan.

Going back to the test plan we just defined let's add the following and see the

> effect in the expand output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
effect in the ``expand`` output:
```

.. code-block::

  unit: test plan
  id: tutorial-extended
  _name: Extended Tutorial Test Plan
  include:
    network_iface_info
    network_available
    network_speed certification-status=blocker
  certification_status_overrides:
    apply blocker to network_available

> Running expand we can see that the certification status changed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running ``expand`` we can see that the certification status changed:
```

.. code-block::

  (checkbox_venv) $ checkbox-cli expand -f json com.canonical.certification::tutorial-extended  | jq 'map({id: .id, "certification-status": .["certification-status"]})'
  [
    {
      "id": "com.canonical.certification::network_available",
      "certification-status": "blocker"
    },
    {
      "id": "com.canonical.certification::network_iface_info",
      "certification-status": "non-blocker"
    },
    {
      "id": "com.canonical.certification::network_speed",
      "certification-status": "blocker"
    }
  ]

Note that there are two ways of setting overrides. You should always prefer
the inline override over the other if possible. The block override
(``certification_status_overrides``) is meant to be used only when you want to
use a regex to apply the override (to match a subset of a template expansion)
or when the job you want to override is not in the list due to ``nested-parts``
(that we will introduce further below).

Bootstrap Inclusions
====================

As we have previously discussed, resources are the backbone of Checkbox

> information gathering. Using the data they generate jobs are skipped or ran and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information gathering. Using the data they generate, jobs are skipped or ran and
```

templates are instantiated. Although Checkbox does try to pull all resources
and dependencies you may need into a test plan automatically, jobs may
interfere or break resources so, ideally, we would like to run them before
anything else. Bootstrap include does exactly this.

The bootstrap section of a test plan is the initial information gathering phase
of a test plan. Although there aren't any limitations as to what you can include
in the ``bootstrap_include`` section, we advise to only put there information
gathering jobs.

Let's go back to our test plan and move the resource job ``network_iface_info``
in the ``bootstrap_include`` section:

.. code-block::

  unit: test plan
  id: tutorial-extended
  _name: Extended Tutorial Test Plan

>   bootstrap-include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  bootstrap_include:
```

    network_iface_info
  include:
    network_available
    network_speed certification-status=blocker
  certification_status_overrides:
    apply blocker to network_available

You may have noticed we weren't including ``network_available_interface`` in
the test plan before, this is because it would not have expanded
deterministically. One of the dangers of letting Checkbox
automatically pull resource jobs for you is that, in some situations, like
``template-resource``, it won't do it. If you were to remove the test that
actually pulled the resource automatically (the one that uses it as in the
``resource`` field), you would inadvertently lose test coverage.

Let's update the test plan including it:

.. code-block::

  unit: test plan
  id: tutorial-extended
  _name: Extended Tutorial Test Plan

>   bootstrap-include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  bootstrap_include:
```

    network_iface_info
  include:
    network_available_interface
    network_available
    network_speed certification-status=blocker
  certification_status_overrides:
    apply blocker to network_available

> When we run expand on the test plan, two important changes occur in the output:
> 
> First, the resource job is no longer visible - this is expected! The bootstrap
> section of a test plan is meant to gather essential data before the main test
> execution but is not composed of actual tests, so the jobs there are excluded
> from the expand command.
> 
> Second, our newly added template wasn't expanded. This happens because a
> template is expanded on the result of a resource, and only running the resource
> can give that output (that is often specific to one machine!). If we want to
> see what would the test plan expand to on the current machine, we can use
> ``list-bootstrapped``:
> 
> Try to run the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we run ``expand`` on the test plan, two important changes occur in the
output:

- First, the resource job is no longer visible – this is expected! The
  bootstrap section of a test plan is meant to gather essential data before the
  main test execution but is not composed of actual tests, so the jobs there
  are excluded from the expand command.
- Second, our newly added template wasn't expanded. This happens because a
  template is expanded on the result of a resource, and only running the
  resource can give that output (that is often specific to one machine!). If we
  want to see all the jobs that would be executed on the current machine if we
  ran that test plan, we can use ``list-bootstrapped``:
```

  com.canonical.certification::network_available_enp2s0f0
  com.canonical.certification::network_available_enp5s0
  com.canonical.certification::network_available_wlan0
  com.canonical.certification::network_available_enp7s0f3u1u2
  com.canonical.certification::network_available
  com.canonical.certification::network_speed

Nested Parts
============

It is often useful to re-use the same test plan to test a functionality. This
is for many reasons but mainly the fact that test plans are always evolving,
adding better tests, increasing the coverage, removing old ones, and to keep
them in sync is a very error prone chore. Checkbox has a feature to help with
this: ``nested_part``.

When a test plan has a ``nested_part``, all "parts" (jobs + other nested parts)
are added to the test plan. Let's try this with an example. When a new test plan
is being developed for certification purposes, one nested part is compulsory to
include (or the submissions will be rejected): ``submission-cert-automated``.
Let's include it in our test plan:

.. code-block::

  unit: test plan
  id: tutorial-extended
  _name: Extended Tutorial Test Plan
  bootstrap_include:
    network_iface_info
  include:

>     network_available_.*

Reviewer: You were using a template id in the previous test plan definition, and you switched to regex. Is this intentional?

    network_available
    network_speed certification-status=blocker
  nested_part:
    submission-cert-automated
  certification_status_overrides:

>     apply blocker to network_available

Reviewer: You can use the `:emphasize-lines:` directive to highlight specific parts of your code block. This would be pretty useful in this case. See [this example for instance.](https://github.com/canonical/checkbox/blob/main/docs/explanation/configs.rst?plain=1#L137)

For example, the ``network_speed`` test that we have in our test plan may be
expensive to run, we can create a new test plan with it excluded as follows:

.. code-block::

  unit: test plan
  id: tutorial-extended-no-speed
  _name: Extended Tutorial Test Plan without the speed test
  nested_part:
    tutorial-extended
  exclude:
    network_speed

Now if we ``list-bootstrapped`` the test plan we will see that the test is
missing:

.. code-block::

  (checkbox_venv) $ checkbox-cli list-bootstrapped com.canonical.certification::tutorial-extended-no-speed
  [...jobs from submission-cert-automated...]
  com.canonical.certification::network_iface_info
  com.canonical.certification::network_available_enp2s0f0
  com.canonical.certification::network_available_enp5s0
  com.canonical.certification::network_available_wlan0
  com.canonical.certification::network_available_enp7s0f3u1u2
  com.canonical.certification::network_available

.. note::
   Excluding a test via ``exclude`` in the test plan is different from using
   ``exclude`` in the launcher. If you use ``exclude`` in the launcher, you
   are modifying the test plan, so it will not be accepted as a submission on

>    C3, while if you use ``exclude`` in a test plan, you are creating a new,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   C3, whereas if you use ``exclude`` in a test plan, you are creating a new,
```

   different test plan.

Using exclude to remove tests is one mechanism to customize your test plan, but
be warned, if you find yourself adding many excludes (10+), you should probably
re-evaluate the nested parts you are choosing for your test plan or reason
about why you are excluding those tests, maybe some need an updated definition!

.. warning::
   While ``exclude`` is a list of regexes, so you can use a regex to exclude

>    jobs, you should most likely avoid doing that as you may inadvertently lose
>    more jobs (and time) than you were aiming for. Try to always precisely match

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   jobs, you should most likely avoid doing that as you may inadvertently deselect
   more jobs than you were aiming for. Try to always precisely match
```

   what you want to exclude, for templates, for example, use the template id

>    whenever you can instead of regex matching the generated id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   whenever you can instead of regex matching the generated id.
```

Mandatory Inclusions
====================

Exclusions are a nice mechanism to inherit a test plan partially, but they are
sometimes too powerful. One may exclude things by mistake and completely void a
test plan of any use, for example excluding all functional tests from it.
Mandatory inclusions are a tool to avoid this. When a test is mandatory
included, it is not affected by exclude.

To get an example, let's go back to our new test plan and try to exclude the
``info/systemd-analyze-critical-chain`` test:

.. code-block::

  unit: test plan
  id: tutorial-extended-no-speed
  _name: Extended Tutorial Test Plan without the speed test
  nested_part:
    tutorial-extended
  exclude:
    network_speed
    info/systemd-analyze-critical-chain

See how the output of ``list-bootstrapped`` is unaffected.

.. code-block::

  (checkbox_venv) $ checkbox-cli list-bootstrapped com.canonical.certification::tutorial-extended-no-speed
  [...]
  com.canonical.certification::info/systemd-analyze-critical-chain
  [...]

> The reason is that all tests in the ``submission-cert-automated`` are mandatory
> includes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason is that all tests in the ``submission-cert-automated`` nested part are mandatory
includes: they will be executed regardless of any other rule in your test plan.
```
